Adds information about the importance of adaptive allocations (#1454)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/elastic-inference/inference-api.md

  - id: kibana
---

# Inference integrations

{{es}} provides a machine learning [inference API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/v8/operation/operation-inference-get-1) to create and manage inference endpoints that integrate with services such as Elasticsearch (for built-in NLP models like [ELSER](/explore-analyze/machine-learning/nlp/ml-nlp-elser.md) and [E5](/explore-analyze/machine-learning/nlp/ml-nlp-e5.md)), as well as  popular third-party services like Amazon Bedrock, Anthropic, Azure AI Studio, Cohere, Google AI, Mistral, OpenAI, Hugging Face, and more.

You can create a new inference endpoint:

- using the [Create an inference endpoint API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/v8/operation/operation-inference-put-1)
- through the [Inference endpoints UI](#add-inference-endpoints).

## Inference endpoints UI [inference-endpoints]

> You can manage inference endpoints using the UI.
> 
> The **Inference endpoints** page provides an interface for managing inference endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Inference endpoints** page provides an interface for managing inference endpoints.
```
The title and the second line of the paragraph are explicit enough. Perhaps we can remove the first line to avoid repeating "inference endpoints" three times over two lines of text.

This feature is only supported for models deployed in Elastic’s infrastructure, such as ELSER, E5, or models uploaded through Eland. It is not available for third-party services (for example, Alibaba Cloud, Cohere, or OpenAI), because those models are hosted externally and not deployed within your Elasticsearch cluster.

When adaptive allocations are enabled:

* The number of allocations scales up automatically when the load increases.
* Allocations scale down to a minimum of 0 when the load decreases, saving resources.

### Allocation scaling behavior

The behavior of allocations depends on several factors:

- Deployment type (Elastic Cloud Hosted, Elastic Cloud Enterprise, or Serverless)
- Usage level (low, medium, or high)
- Optimization type ([ingest](/deploy-manage/autoscaling/trained-model-autoscaling.md#ingest-optimized) or [search](/deploy-manage/autoscaling/trained-model-autoscaling.md#search-optimized))

For more information about adaptive allocations and resources, refer to the [trained model autoscaling](/deploy-manage/autoscaling/trained-model-autoscaling.md) documentation.

> ::::{note}

Reviewer 2: If we're delegating to the trained model page, should this note still live here or would it make sense to move that too?

Author: Where do you think it would make more sense to place it?
IMO it should live here because it links to the Trained model autoscaling page, where all the autoscaling information is located.  But maybe I'm misunderstanding your comment? 🤔

Reviewer 2: - I agree it's good to have cost warning here. But I'd also expect this to be on the main page we're linking to, so I was just wondering if that duplication is OK.
- I'm not sure about the current placement of the note. 
  - Here's my thinking: The `::::{note}` goes into details about pricing implications but we've already sent readers to another page with "_For more information about adaptive allocations and resources, refer to the [trained model autoscaling](/deploy-manage/autoscaling/trained-model-autoscaling.md) documentation._" So the flow feels wrong. I'd argue for moving the cost note before the link. And also perhaps it should be `important` given it deals with real cost implications. 
- Nit: I think the wording could be more concise too.

Author: Sorry, I thought you were referring to the sentence before the note - but it totally makes sense now.

My point is that we should include it here because the support ticket that raised this issue were about customers using inference services without realizing the cost implications.
Part of this is already mentioned on the trained model autoscaling page, specifically:

> Note: If you set the minimum number of allocations to 1, you will be charged even if the system is not using those resources.

In this case, I think the duplication is fine, as it's important to warn users about potential costs (according to the issue, this information was missing from this page.)

You're absolutely right that placing the note before that sentence interrupts the flow - I’ll move it and rework the wording a bit.

Thanks so much for your suggestions!

1. Provide the required configuration details.
1. Select **Save** to create the endpoint.

> If your inference endpoint uses a model deployed in Elastic’s infrastructure, such as ELSER, E5, or a model uploaded through Eland, you can configure [adaptive allocations](#adaptive-allocations) to reduce resource usage and save costs.

Reviewer 3: It's not just about reducing resources and saving costs, it might be the opposite: spinning up more resources, which increases costs. It all depends on how resource-intensive the operation is. If it demands more computing power, we'll scale up – up until a certain limit. I'd rephrase this sentence, something like, "... you can configure adaptive allocations to dynamically adjust resources based on the demand of current operations", or something along those lines.

## Adaptive allocations [adaptive-allocations]

Adaptive allocations allow inference services to dynamically adjust the number of model allocations based on the current load.

> This feature is only supported for models deployed in Elastic’s infrastructure, such as ELSER, E5, or models uploaded through Eland. It is not available for third-party services like Alibaba Cloud, Cohere, or OpenAI.

Reviewer 3: It might be worth considering adding a short explanation why it's not available for third-party services (the models are not deployed in the cluster).

When adaptive allocations are enabled:

* The number of allocations scales up automatically when the load increases.
* Allocations scale down to a minimum of 0 when the load decreases, saving resources.

::::{warning}

> If you don't use adaptive allocations, the deployment will always use a fixed amount of resources, which can lead to unnecessary usage and higher costs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you don't use adaptive allocations, the deployment will always consume a fixed amount of resources, regardless of actual usage. This can lead to inefficient resource utilization and higher costs.
```
